# Migration Guide

## Description

The following guide highlights potential migration steps necessary during `theia` upgrades discovered when adopting the framework.
Please see the latest version (`master`) for the most up-to-date information. Please contribute any issues you experienced when upgrading to a newer version of Theia to this document, even for previous releases.

## Guide

### General

Due to a [colors.js](https://github.com/Marak/colors.js) issue, a [resolution](https://classic.yarnpkg.com/lang/en/docs/selective-version-resolutions/) may be necessary for your application in order to workaround the problem:

For example:

```json
"resolutions": {
    "**/colors": "<=1.4.0"
}
```

### v1.24.0

#### node-gyp 8.4.1

The `electron-rebuild` dependency was upgraded which in turn upgraded `node-gyp` to `v8.4.1`.
This version of `node-gyp` does not support **Python2** (which is EOL) so **Python3** is necessary during the build.

#### From WebSocket to Socket.io

This is a very important change to how Theia sends and receives messages with its backend.

This new Socket.io protocol will try to establish a WebSocket connection whenever possible, but it may also
setup HTTP polling. It may even try to connect through HTTP before attempting WebSocket.

Make sure your network configurations support both WebSockets and/or HTTP polling.

### Monaco 1.65.2

This version updates the Monaco code used in Theia to the state of VSCode 1.65.2, and it changes the way that code is consumed from ASM modules loaded and put on the
`window.monaco` object to ESM modules built into the bundle using Webpack.

#### ASM to ESM

Two kinds of changes may be required to consume Monaco using ESM modules.

 - If your application uses its own Webpack config rather than that generated by the @theia/dev-packages, you
will need to update that config to remove the `CopyWebpackPlugin` formerly used to place Monaco
code in the build folder and to build a separate entrypoint for the `editor.worker`. See [the changes here](https://github.com/eclipse-theia/theia/pull/10736/files#diff-b4677f3ff57d8b952eeefc10493ed3600d2737f9b5c9b0630b172472acb9c3a2)
 - If your application uses its own frontend generator, you should modify the code that generates the `index.html` to load the `script` containing the bundle into the `body` element rather than the head. See [changes here](https://github.com/eclipse-theia/theia/pull/10947/files)
 - References to the `window.monaco` object should be replaced with imports from `@theia/monaco-editor-core`. In most cases, simply adding an import `import * as monaco from
'@theia/monaco-editor-core'` will suffice. More complex use cases may require imports from specific parts of Monaco. Please see
[the PR](https://github.com/eclipse-theia/theia/pull/10736) for details, and please post any questions or problems there.

Using ESM modules, it is now possible to follow imports to definitions and to the Monaco source code. This should aid in tracking down issues related to changes in Monaco discussed
below.

#### Changes to Monaco

The Monaco API has changed in significant ways since the last uplift. One of the most significant is the handling of overrides to services instantiated by Monaco.

 - The style of service access `monaco.StaticServices.<ServiceName>.get()` is no longer available. Instead, use `StaticServices.get(<ServiceIdentifier>)` with a service
identifier imported from `@theia/monaco-editor-core`.
 - Any service overrides that should be used for all instantiations in Monaco should be passed to the first call of `StaticServices.initialize`. The first call is used to set the
services for all subsequent calls. Overrides passed to subsequent calls to `StaticServices.initialize` will be ignored. To change the overrides used, please override
[`MonacoFrontendApplicationContribution.initialize`](https://github.com/eclipse-theia/theia/pull/10736/files#diff-99d13bb12b3c33ada58d66291db38b8b9f61883822b08b228f0ebf30b457a85d).
 - Services that should be used for a particular instantiation must be passed to a child of the global `IInstantiationService`. See `MonacoEditor.getInstantiationWithOverrides`
for an example.

Other changes include a number of changes of name from `mode` -> `language` and changes of interface. Please consult [the PR](https://github.com/eclipse-theia/theia/pull/10736) or
the Monaco source code included with `@theia/monaco-editor-core`.

#### Breaking changes in Theia

Please see the CHANGELOG for details of changes to Theia interfaces.

### v1.23.0

#### TypeScript 4.5.5

If you are using TypeScript <= 4.5.5 and you encounter issues when building your Theia application because your compiler fails to parse our type definitions,
then you should upgrade to TypeScript >= 4.5.5.

#### Socket.io

If you are deploying multiple Theia nodes behind a load balancer, you will have to enable sticky-sessions,
as it is now required by the new WebSocket implementation using Socket.io protocol.

For more details, see the socket.io documentation about [using multiple nodes](https://socket.io/docs/v4/using-multiple-nodes/#enabling-sticky-session).

### v1.22.0

#### Electron Update

Electron got updated from 9 to 15, this might involve some modifications in your code based on the new APIs.

See Electron's [documentation](https://github.com/electron/electron/tree/15-x-y/docs).

Most notably the `electron.remote` API got deprecated and replaced with a `@electron/remote` package.

Theia makes use of that package and re-exports it as `@theia/core/electron-shared/@electron/remote`.

See `@theia/core` re-exports [documentation](../packages/core/README.md#re-exports).

Lastly, Electron must now be defined in your application's `package.json` under `devDependencies`.

`theia build` will automatically add the entry and prompt you to re-install your dependencies when out of sync.

### v1.21.0

#### Frontend Source Maps

The frontend's source map naming changed. If you had something like the following in your debug configurations:

```json
      "sourceMapPathOverrides": {
        "webpack://@theia/example-electron/*": "${workspaceFolder}/examples/electron/*"
      }
```

You can delete this whole block and replace it by the following:

```json
      "webRoot": "${workspaceFolder}/examples/electron"
```

### v1.17.0

#### ES2017

- Theia was updated to ES2017
  - es5 VS Code extensions and Theia plugins are still supported
  - If you require an es5 codebase you should be able to transpile back to es5 using webpack
  - The following code transpiles back to an es2015 codebase:
    ```
    config.module.rules.push({
        test: /\.js$/,
        use: {
            loader: 'babel-loader',
            options: {
                presets: [['@babel/preset-env', { targets: { chrome: '58', ie: '11' } }]],
            }
        }
    });
    ```
  - Replace the targets with the ones that are needed for your use case
  - Make sure to use `inversify@5.1.1`. Theia requires `inversify@^5.0.1` which means that `5.1.1` is compatible,
    but your lockfile might reference an older version.

### v1.16.0

[Release](https://github.com/eclipse-theia/theia/releases/tag/v1.16.0)

- N/A.

### v1.15.0

[Release](https://github.com/eclipse-theia/theia/releases/tag/v1.15.0)

#### Keytar:

- [`keytar`](https://github.com/atom/node-keytar) was added as a dependency for the secrets API. and may require `libsecret` in your particular distribution to be functional:
  - Debian/Ubuntu: `sudo apt-get install libsecret-1-dev`
  - Red Hat-based: `sudo yum install libsecret-devel`
  - Arch Linux: `sudo pacman -S libsecret`
  - Alpine: `apk add libsecret-dev`
- It is possible that a `yarn resolution` is necessary for `keytar` to work on older distributions (the fix was added in `1.16.0` by downgrading the dependency version):

  ```json
  "resolutions": {
    "**/keytar": "7.6.0",
  }
  ```

- `keytar` uses [`prebuild-install`](https://github.com/prebuild/prebuild-install) to download prebuilt binaries. If you are experiencing issues where some shared libraries are missing from the system it was originally built upon, you can tell `prebuild-install` to build the native extension locally by setting the environment variable before performing `yarn`:

  ```sh
  # either:
  export npm_config_build_from_source=true
  yarn
  # or:
  npm_config_build_from_source=true yarn
  ```

#### Webpack

- The version of webpack was upgraded from 4 to 5 and may require additional shims to work properly given an application's particular setup.
- The `webpack` dependency may need to be updated if there are errors when performing a `production` build of the application due to a bogus `webpack-sources` dependency. The valid `webpack` version includes `^5.36.2 <5.47.0`. If necessary, you can use a `yarn resolution` to fix the issue:

  ```json
  "resolutions": {
    "**/webpack": "5.46.0",
  }
  ```
